# ocsigen-i18n

I18n made easy for OCaml apps.

### ocsigen-i18n

```
usage: ocsigen-i18n [options] [< input] [> output]
  --languages         Comma-separated languages (e.g. en,fr-fr, or Foo.Fr,Foo.Us if using external types). Must be ordered as in source TSV file.
  --default-language  Set the default language (default is the first one in --languages).
  --input-file        TSV file containing keys and translations. If option is omited or set to -, read on stdin.
  --output-file        File TSV file containing keys and translations. If option is omitted or set to -, write on stdout.
  --external-type     Values passed to --languages option come from a predefined type (do not generate the type nor from/to string functions).
  --primary           Generated file is secondary and depends on given primary file.
  --eliom             Generate code for a client-server Eliom app
  --tyxml             Generate code for a Tyxml-based app (for example a server-side Eliom app)
  --header            Generate only the file header 
  -help               Display this list of options
  --help              Display this list of options
```

### ocsigen-i18n-rewriter

The ppx supports two general forms of constructions:
 - I18n entries in the 'default' file
 - I18n entries in a given module

You can use `ocsigen-i18n` to generate multiple `.ml` or `.eliom` files
from different TSV files. One of those will be the "default" one.

Use the `-ppx 'ocsigen-i18n-rewriter --default-module DEFAULT'` where `DEFAULT`
is the name of the module generated with `ocsigen-i18n-generator`
you wish to use as a default for all extension expressions
(basename of the output file)

This will call the right function turning
`[%i18n foo]` into `DEFAULT.foo ()`,
`[%i18n S.bar ~x:"foo"]` into `DEFAULT.S.bar ~x:"foo" ()]` and so on...

To specify a different module from the default one, you can do so using
expressions such as these:
 - `[%i18n MyI18n.foo]` will become `MyI18n.foo ()`
 - `[%i18n MyI18n.S.bar ~x:[%i18n S.foo]]` will become `MyI18n.S.bar ~x:(DEFAULT.S.foo ()) ()`

Because the rewriter infers your module from the module-path of your expression,
it needs to make the assumption that a module named `S` will *always* be
the one generated by `ocsigen-i18n-generator` for strings.
**Do not name your i18n file `s.tsv`. It won't be compatible.**

### Affixing the module names

Because the ppx already forces you to `i18n` in the expression,
and because most projects will want to keep sane files with `i18n` in their names,
it would be likely to end up with expressions like `[%i18n I18n_a.entry]`.

This is redundant and heavy. So, **if you like**, you can auto-prefix and auto-suffix your module names.

Calling the rewriter with `-ppx 'ocsigen-i18n-rewriter --prefix Pr_ --suffix _i18n --default-module DEFAULT'`
will prefix and suffix all **custom modules** (i.e. not the `DEFAULT` one) with `Pr_` and `_i18n`.

As such, `[%i18n Feature.foo]` will become `Pr_Feature_i18n.foo ()`,
allowing for clearer and more readable expressions.

The prefix *must* begin with a capital letter, to make it a legit module name start.

If you use these options, note that your file will need to account for the capital in the middle part.
`[%i18n Module.entry]` still needs `Module` to be a module name.

## Installation

```
opam pin add ocsigen-i18n https://github.com/besport/ocsigen-i18n.git
opem install ocsigen-i18n
```

### How to

#### Templating system

Define your translations into a tsv file. The first column is the key
to use (i.e. the name of the OCaml variable to use in your code).
The next columns are the translation for each language you want to
use.


```
foo	This is a simple key.	Ceci est une clé toute simple.
bar	I am {{x}}.	Je suis {{x}}.
baz	There {{{c?are||is}}} apple{{{c?s||}}} here!	Il y a {{{c?des||une}}} pomme{{{c?s||}}} ici !
bu	I am {{x %s}} ({{n %d}}).	Je suis {{x %s}} ({{n %d}}).
```

- `{{x}}` defines a variable labeled `~x`
- `{{x %d}}` defines a variable labeled `~x`, and the `%d` format is used to
  display `x` as a string.
- `{{x?a||b}}` defines an optional boolean value `?x`.
  If `x` is `true` then `a` will be displayed.
  If it is `false` (which is the default), then `b` is chosen.

#### Using the templates

```ocaml
[%i18n foo]
[%i18n bar ~x:[%i18n a_human]]
[%i18n bar ~x:[ pcdata "Jean-Michel ("
              ; pcdata @@ string_of_int id
              ; pcdata ")" ] ]
[%i18n baz]
[%i18n baz ~c:(nb > 1)]
[%i18n bu ~x:"Jean-Michel" ~n:id ]
```

This will generate an HTML fragment (a list of elements). If you want a string
instead of a list of elements, prefix the variable name by `S.`, e.g.
`[%i18n S.bar ~s:[%i18n S.a_human]]`.

#### Notes about the templates

A conditional value `{{{c?if_true||if_false}}}` will generate a function
taking an optional parameter `?(c=false)` to define if `if_true` or `if_false`
needs to be printed.

Languages does not need to use the same labeled variables. The compiler
will generate a function taking all the parameters it can detect when
parsing the template.

Variable name used twice refers to the same argument.
